---
layout: layout.njk
title: Steampunk and Neo-Victorian Notes
---

# Steampunk and Neo-Victorian notes

This page in my [web garden](/web-gardening/index.html) is currently just excerpts/reading notes from scholarly literature about steampunk and neo-Victorian things. Originally, I made these notes as part of preparation for a paper presentation about [the video game Frostpunk](/frostpunk/index.html) although doing this reading made me start to wonder about various subterranean threads connecting steampunk and neo-Victorian things to live coding, which is something I'll probably come back to...


## [McAllister, Robbie (2018). "Reengineering Modernity:Cinematic Detritus and the Steampunk Blockbuster." *Neo-Victorian Studies* 11:1](https://neovictorianstudies.com/article/view/33)

- "The  word  steampunk was  first  coined  in the  April  1987  edition  of the science-fiction  magazine Locus. Writing  to  the  editor, author  K.  W. Jeter playfully  designated himself  (alongside fellow  writers Tim  Powers  and James  Blaylock)  as propagators  of  a  literary  trend: creators  of  science-fantasy    fictions    that    utilise    historically-disjointed    nineteenth-century technologies  and  settings (Jeter  1987: 57)."
"What  unites  steampunk across various  media is its retro-futuristic  vision  of Victorian  life  where industrial progress   has   careened wildly   off   its   historical   track ,transformed   by anachronistic  machinery."
- "the steampunk genre does little to mask its construction, recasting its fictional histories as alternatives, falsities,  and  often  explicit  lies. As  texts  that  flout  historical  credibility through  their  anachronistic  tendencies,  they  might  (most  alarmingly)  be considered  as  definitive  examples  of Fredric Jameson’s  warnings  of  a postmodern  perpetuation  of –what  he  termed –“the  enfeeblement  of historicity in our own time”(Jameson 1990: 130)."

## [Danahay, Martin (2016). " Steampunk as a Postindustrial Aesthetic: “All that is solid melts in air”". *Neo-Victorian Studies* 8:2.](https://neovictorianstudies.com/article/view/106)

- "steampunklacks a coherent political agenda., At least in part,it is an aestheticmore concerned withproducing beautiful  objectsthan  advocating  aclear programmeof  widersocial  reorganisation.  In  its reaction against “all that is solid melts in air”, it romanticisesnineteenth-century industrial production and uses its objects for postindustrial leisure consumption."
- "both  steampunk  and  Arts  and Crafts  present  challenges  in  defining themselvesas  coherent  movements beyond a visceral rejection of contemporary industrialisation, represented by factories (as  opposed  to  collaborative  workshops) for  the  Arts  and  Crafts movement  and  by  computer  products(whether  individually  or  collectively manufactured) for  steampunk.  In  both  cases  a  commitment  to  creating handcrafted objects is not necessarily linked to an articulatedpolitical cause, although some practitioners do attempt to establish a wider social agenda for the  aesthetic. Neither  representsa coherent ‘movement’inthe  sense  of  a political  organisation with  explicit  demands  for  social  justice(Tilley  and Wood   2009:   3-5),   which   I   will   argue   in   conclusion ultimately   risks subvertingsteampunk’s opposition  to  commodification  and rendering  its aesthetic liable to co-option by commercial interests." (makes me think of live coding, also!)
- "For steampunks, there isno ‘authentic’Victorian period  (nor  an  authentic  Medieval  age  as  celebrated  by  the  Arts  and  Crafts movement). Steampunk therefore express a postmodern approach to history in  which  anachronistic  references  can  be  winsomely  mixed  together  for  an effect  that  is  fueled  by  adesire  to  refashionthe  past  by  rewriting  its  texts and  recycling  its  products.For  Morris  this  would  be  destroying  the  past, whereas for steampunk it is an imaginary resistance to the revolutionising of the means of production."
"Victorian  London  in  steampunk  is  botha  reference pointand a historical space that can be reshaped at will through imagination, in a fictional parallel to the ‘creative destruction’of capital tearing down old buildings  and  erecting  larger,  more  profitable  structures  in  their  place.  In steampunk  fiction’s urban  environments“all  that  is  solid  melts  in  air” thanks  to these flows  of  capital,  and to  the  resulting reshaping of  London. By extension this reconfiguration of the urban landscape is applied to time,where  familiar historical events  and  figures  are  brought  into  collision  with oneanother in re-imagined chronologies reshaped by digital technologies."
- The author has further publications about the Arts and Craft movement in conjunction with/relation to steampunk: [Martin Danahay – English Language & Literature](https://brocku.ca/humanities/english-language-and-literature/faculty/martin-danahay/#publications)
- "Pho and Goh  point  out  the  dangers  of  recuperating  colonialismthrough  steampunk celebrations of imperial power (Pho and Goh: 2012: 104)" - Pho,  Diana  M.  and  Jaymee  Goh.  2012.  ‘Steampunk:  Stylish  Subversion  and Colonial Chic’, in (ed. Tarrant, Sheila and Marjorie Jolles)Fashion Talks. Albany, New York: SUNY Press, 191-208.
- Conclusion: "In  a  postindustrial  environment  where relationships  are  being  monetised  in  online  social  media  like  Facebook, steampunk couldprovide  a  literary  and  visual  vocabulary  with  which  to resist such commodificationof everyday interactions. As it currently stands, however,steampunk only performs an aestheticreaction against the fear that“everything solid melts in air”.Cogs, steam and  dirigibles alone do not yet represent  a  significant and  sustained resistance  to  the  endless  cycle  of production  and  consumption  to  which  we  are  all  connected,  online  and offline, as consuming subjects."

## [Patrick Jagoda (2010). " Clacking Control Societies: Steampunk, History, and the Difference Engine of Escape." *Neo-Victorian Studies* 3:1.](https://neovictorianstudies.com/article/view/250)

- "the novel travels down an earlier path, available yet never traversed during the early nineteenth century, in order to examine the underlying contingency of history." (speaking of The Difference Engine)
- "The  narrative  about  power  that  underlies The  Difference  Enginemost  closely  resembles  the  history  elaborated  by  Foucault  between  the 1960s and 1980s. In his major works, Foucault describes a transition from a sovereign  society  to  a  disciplinary  society..."
- "Some  government  Engines  in  this  alternative  Victorian  society  are devoted  to  theoretical  science  and  pure  mathematics,  but  most  of  their computing  power  is  devoted  to  statistical  analyses and  police  surveillance. One  character,  Prince  Albert,  articulates  this  biopolitical  function,  when  he argues,  “[S]tatistics  is  the  key  to  the  future.  Statistics  are  everything  in England”  (Gibson  and  Sterling  1990:  369)."
- A key turn in the article is the argument that The Difference Engine stages a progression from sovereign through disciplinary to control forms of power. (By contrast, FrostPunk oscillates between sovereign and disciplinary forms.)
